## Assignment #03 (15 points)

### A Passage of Old Testament Poetry — Psalm 79

As you read this passage, be mindful of what we covered in class about how OT poetry works.

In particular: In [Handout #07] we mentioned that in OT poetry, the lines usually come in pairs. But sometimes verses of poetry will be a "triplet" = will have three lines. Sometimes it feels like there is a line "left over". Do you recall what we said is usually the case when there is a line left over?

### Read Psalm 79

1. Psalms usually do not specifically tell us what events they are referring to. They often describe the event in view, but they do not come right out and identify it. From what `Ps 79` says, what major event in Israel's history is it referring to? What details in `Ps 79` tell us this? (`3 points`)

2. Do you find any triplets in `Ps 79`? Where? (`2 points`)

3. List a verse that you think is not flatly literal language. If the language is not flatly literal, nonetheless, what point is the verse making? (`3 points`)

4. Can you find a verse that reflects how pagan nations might view the major event that this psalm is referring to? (See [Handout #10], p. 3 or 4). (`2 points`)

5. Obviously, the major event in view in `Ps 79` was harmful to Israel. But is Israel the only party that the writer of `Ps 79` feels has been insulted? Who else has been insulted? Which verse? (`2 points`)

6. Summarize what `Ps 79` is about, what it is saying. (`3 points`)

[Handout #07]: {% post_url 2022-02-14-lecture-10 %}
[Handout #10]: {% post_url 2022-02-09-lecture-9 %}