BS 102 / 502  Biblical Interpretation    Name:  ____________________________
Kairos University, a Campus of AEU  Dr. Daniel Lane / Feb  2022

Assignment #05   (40 points  //  Due:  Sunday, March 6, 11:59 pm)

Two Books of the Bible:  Micah, and Galatians

You may use class notes, the Bible, Bible references books, or the internet, to find answers.

Specific Instructions:   Download this Assignment, fill in your answers, and save a copy in your files as a Word doc.  You will submit your finished assignment to the class portal under the "Quiz" section.  It is due Sunday, March 1, 11:59 pm.

The Book of Micah     (20 points.  Questions here are worth 1 pt. each unless indicated otherwise.)

1. What is the approximate date that Micah prophesied?


2. Is Israel under the Sinai covenant at that time?


3. What / where is Zion?  (2 points)


4. Names two or three major events in the Old Testament that set the stage for the time of the prophet Micah; they are events that happened before the time of Micah.   (These are all things we discussed in class).  (6 points)





Read the book of Micah.  As you read, look for the next two items.

5. Is there a passage which prophesies that Samaria will become a pile of rubble?
 Which verse(s):


6. Is there a similar passage about Zion?   Which verse(s):


7. Did the prophecy about Samaria come true during the time of the Old Testament?  If so, when?



8. Did the prophecy about Zion come true during the time of the Old Testament?  If so, when?



9. Summarize two or three main ideas that Micah was trying to emphasize; refer to the verses that support what you are saying.   (6 points)




= = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
The Book of Galatians    (20 points.  Questions here are worth 2 points unless indicated otherwise.)

Read through the book of Galatians.

1. Paul introduces his general concern in Gal 1:6–10.
 How would you describe his mood and tone of voice in this section?  Point to specific verses as evidence.  (4 points)



2. Again, Paul states his general concern in Gal 1:6–10.   But he states the specific reason for his concern later in the book (somewhere after ch. 2).   (6 points)

 What is the specific reason for his concern?     What verse(s) state it?




3. Does this issue get addressed in the book of Acts?
 Where?   (Hint: between ch. 13 and ch. 18)


4. What decision is reached about this issue in the book of Acts?   (4 points)



5. In his letter to the Galatians, does Paul appeal to the decision reached in the book of Acts?  Does he refer to the council at Jerusalem?



6. After Paul finishes his main argument, he goes on to give the Galatians some practical instructions for how they should, and should not, live.
 Which verses contains Paul’s practical instructions?







For Your Personal Reflection:

Re-Read Gal 6:17.
Then read Acts 9:1–19, esp. v. 16.
Then read Acts 14:8–20, esp. v. 19.
Then read 2 Cor 11:1–29.
Then re-read Galatians 6:17.


* * * * *
