## I. No One is a "Neutral" Interpreter —

## II. General Principles & Guidelines:

1. **A Basic Principle**:

   Interpretation should fit the historical setting, the grammar, and the context of the passage.

   That is, it should fit with…

2. Observe the text carefully; pay attention to the details.

   **Example**: `Eph 3:5` does not read, "which was not known at _at all_ in former times…"

   Instead, it reads: "which was not known in former times _as it has been made known now_."

3. Do *not* overdrive the text; do not say more than the text says.

   > &hellip;and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. `Jer 23:28` (ed)

   - `James 2:24`
   - *`Mark 16:16`*

4. Don't build a big house… _on one verse_

   Major doctrines should be built on *multiple references* from a several places in the Bible. They should not be built not on just one verse, especially if it is a verse which is not easy to interpret. Because if you have misunderstood that one verse ➔ *you've got nothing*.

   - `Gal 6:16` Are Christians "spiritual Jews"? Is the church the new / true Israel?

   - `Matt 15:24` "I was only sent to the lost sheep of Israel."

5. When we are reading a specific translation of the Bible, we should bear in mind that translation's approach to translating the Bible.

   - That is ➔ Were the translators trying to be as accurate as possible, even if the resulting translation is somewhat difficult to read?
   - Or, ➔ Were they trying to make sure their translation was very readable, and then after that, be as accurate as they could be?
   - To Note: For matters of doctrine… _use literal translations_

6. When multiple translations of the Bible agree on how they render a verse…

7. A basic principle which pervades all of this is:

   > *Scripture interprets Scripture*

8. Finally, think carefully.

## III. Specific Principe of Interpretation which are especially important for the Bible:

1. Since Scripture does not finally contradict Scripture ➔ If we think the Bible seems to be contradicting itself, then we need to look more carefully at the passage(s) involved, or else improve our understanding of how to interpret the Bible, or both.

2. A passage which directly addresses an issue takes precedence over one which addresses it only indirectly or by implication. Hence it is vital to determine, "What is the topic of this passage?"

3. A passage which is clear on a subject takes precedence over one which is unclear or obscure.

4. A more specific statement takes precedence over, or else qualifies, a general one.

   Examples:
   - *`1 Cor 7:17—24`*, but then note especially `v.21b`.
   - Mutual Christian submission, vs. parent ⮀ child

5. **Recognize the normal summarizing use of language**. (This is similar to "Do not over-drive…")

   Some Examples.
   - *`1 Cor 13:7`* "Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things."
   - *Jesus* often states things in _absolute_ terms, terms which do not easily lend themselves to seeing things in shades of gray. But statements on the same topics _in the epistles_ are often more practical, speaking in realistic terms. Two examples:

   Jesus, speaking to the rich young man in `Matt 19:21` —
   > Jesus said to him, "If you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me."

   Paul, in `1 Tim 6:17` —
   > Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in God, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.

   Jesus, in `Luke 14:26` —
   > If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.

   Paul, in `1 Tim 5:8` —
   > But if anyone does not provide for his relatives, and especially for members of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.

6. **To sum up**:

   **Q**: How can we make sound conclusions about what the Bible is teaching?

   **A**: Base our doctrine and our practice on ➔ *Multiple* passages, which address and issue *directly*, and speak *clearly*.

7. **Finally**, an interpretation which makes the best sense of all the data in the text is to be preferred over one which involves a lot a special pleading.

---

_Editor notes_
> `Q`: Why do elephants paint their toenails green?

> `A`: So they can hide in your front lawn and you can't see them.

> `Q`: Have you ever seen an elephant hiding in your front lawn?

Did not pass the "You've got to be kidding" test.

---
