
The Setting in Judea and Jerusalem when Jesus' Public Ministry Begins
A. Greco-Roman Culture. and Roman Rule:
Ancient Greece and ancient Rome had many features in their cultures that were admirable. Nonetheless, they were also characterized by power struggles, intrigue, greed, betrayal, etc
In Greek culture there was
In Roman culture, there was . . .
Q: Did Greece and Rome tolerate other religions?
Rome and Greece were generally "tolerant" of other religions; they would even offer sacrifices to the foreign gods.
However, they also wanted the other cultures to respect their gods, and to sacrifice to them.  For Rome in particular, this was a 'state religion'. It was not necessary that those who did so had any particular 'personal belief' in Rome's gods. You simply had to offer sacrifices to please  the gods, so that those gods would bless Rome. Most of the pagan cultures that Rome conquered did offer sacrifices to Rome's gods.
People who would not offer sacrifice to Roman gods were viewed as disloyal, or even as rebellious, to Rome. So who did this create a problem for?
The Single most Immediate and Irritating Aspect of Roman Rule was:
This is why tax collectors were especially hated by the Jews. [In the NT, see for example: Matt 9:1 1 , 1 1:19, and
Which disciple of Jesus was a tax collector?
One Major Benefit of Roman Government & Rule: "Pax Romana" Despite its many wars and battles, nonetheless, Rome did bring .
This peace and stability is referred to as "Pax Romana", which means .
In specific, there was one 200-year period of time in Rome's history that was especially peaceful, it was .
B. The Divisions within Judaism = the Jewish Sects:
Factors which Set the Stage for the Divisions among the Jews:
Recall: During the inter-testamental period, some Jews adopted Greek customs & culture; these were the "Hellenizing Jews." But other Jews rejected this completely. Greek influence would remain a factor in Jewish culture. But the tendency for Jews to adopt Greek customs & culture faded when Judah became independent (166 BC), and largely ended around 100 BC.
Also during the inter-testamental period, some kings, even Jewish kings (during the
Hasmonean era, 166—63 BC), violated the requirements of the OT Law, and did not chose high  priests from the line of Aaron / Eleazar / Zadok. The result was that many Jews regarded such high priests as corrupt and illegitimate, and did not accept them.
As a result of this, by the time of Jesus, there were four main division, four main sects, among the Jews: The Essenes, the Pharisees, the Sadducees, and the Zealots.

The Four Divisions, the Four Sects of Jews, during the Life of Jesus:
1 . The Essenes (They are not mentioned in the NT.)   The Essenes .
 	They chose to .
 	They lived lives of piety and simplicity, even poverty. Many did not marry.
 	They were the smallest sect.
 	The Essenes disappeared from history .
2.	The Pharisees
 	Like the Essenes, they rejected Hellenization, and they agreed that the high priesthood was corrupt.
 	But unlike the Essenes, the Pharisees .
 	They accepted the authority of
 	Unlike the Sadducees, the Pharisees believed in .
 	In general, they followed the Law and separated themselves from things that were "unclean" (see for example John 18:28).
 	Jesus sometimes criticized them harshly (Matt ch. 23). But from the writings of Flavius Josephus, we know that the Jews generally regarded them well. They respected them for their knowledge of the Torah = the OT.
 	The Pharisees are the only Jewish sect /party .
3.	The Sadducees
 	By the time of Jesus, the high priests were chosen most often from them
 	Unlike the Pharisees, they did not recognize .
 	Unlike the Pharisees, the Sadducees . . .
 	They did not like the Romans, but they cooperated with them, because
 	They were well-connected with people of wealth and power, but never numerous. They disappear after AD 70.
4.	The Zealots
 	This sect did not arise between the testaments. It arose .
 	This is the group that actively promoted
 	They believed it was a sin against God
 	One of Jesus' disciples was a zealot; Matt 10:4; Mark 3:18,
 	They led the major revolt against Rome in AD 66; they perished at Masada in AD 73.
2
C.	The Jewish Institutions:
1	. The Temple, i.e., the Second Temple.
It is sometimes called "Herod's Temple" because he greatly expanded it, over several years  But Jews call it simply "the second temple."
Jesus prophesied the destruction of the second temple in Luke 19:44. The second temple was destroyed by the Romans in AD 70. Since then, the temple has not been rebuilt.
2	The Sanhedrin	(in the NT they are sometimes called "the chief priests")
From the time of the return from the exile (536 / 516 BC), until the time of Jesus, Judah was only independent for about 100 years (166—63 BC).
When post-exilic Judah was under the control of another nation (Persia, then the Ptolemies, then the Seleucids, then later Rome), the Jewish high priest and the elders exercised much local control over Judah.
In the time of Jesus, the council of priests & elders who exercised much local control over Judea was called the Sanhedrin (see Matt 26:57—59). It had 71 members. The Sanhedrin was the council before which Jesus was put on trial before he was crucified.
3	The Office of High Priest
 	Since the days of Aaron & Moses, they had always come from the tribe of Levi, and from the family line of Zadok. (Ezek 40:46, 45:15).
 	In 174 B.C., Antiochus IV began appointing High Priests on the basis of the amounts of tribute they promised to provide him.
 	During the Hasmonean era (166-63 BC), the Hasmonean kings served as the high priests. [They were from the tribe of Levi, but they were not from the line of Zadok.]
 	Once the Romans took over (63 BC), the Roman ruler appointed the high priest. King Herod also did so when he ruled Judea (starting in 37 BC).
 	During the life of Jesus, Judea was under the direct rule of a Roman governor/prefect. It was the Roman governor (such as Pontius Pilate) who appointed the high priests. They almost always appointed high priests from wealthy families of the
 	In the time of Jesus, the high priest was very influential, even to the Romans. Because Rome recognized him as the representative of the Jewish nation.
 	Thus the relationship between the Roman governors of Judea and the high priests was complex. On the one hand, the governors appointed the high priests. But on the other hand, the high priest can potentially get a governor fired by complaining to Rome.
D.	The Samaritans:
The NT mentions the Samaritans (Matt 10:5; John ch. 4). It makes it clear that they do not get along well with the Jews. The first Samaritans become Christians in Acts 8.
Their Origins: 2 Kings 17 records the fall of Samaria to Assyria. The Assyrians deported thousands of Israelites. But they also imported thousands of people from other countries to live in Israel. The Samaritans are probably a result of the racial mixing between the Israelites who remained and the Gentiles who were brought in. They did worship Yahweh as God, but they only recognized the Torah as Scripture, not the Prophets or the Writings. They also believed the temple should be on Mt. Gerizim (Deut 11:29, 27: 12; Josh 8:33; John 4:20), not in Jerusalem.
