If we are aware of these events, it will help us to understand the New Testament better.

## I. The Years Just Before the Birth of Jesus

Year | Event
---: | :---
37 BC | Herod the Great becomes ruler of Judea
30 BC | Octavian is affirmed as the overall leader of Rome.
27 BC | Octavian receives the title **Augustus** → Caesar Augustus.
±19 BC | Herod the Great begins a massive repair & expansion of **the temple**; the main work takes 8-10 years. [The entire project will not be completed until `AD 63`.] This will be the impressive building that the disciples point out to Jesus (`Luke 21:5`).

## II. The Earthly Life & Ministry of Jesus

Year | Event
---: | :---
6 BC | Jesus is born in Bethlehem [Jesus was born roughly two years before Herod the Great died.]
4 BC | Herod the Great dies; his kingdom is divided three ways among three of his sons.
AD 6 | The reign of the Herod family ends, and **Judea reverts to being a Roman province**. As a Roman province, Judea is now governed directly by a Roman governor = a Roman prefect. [This is when the Jewish sect the Zealots arose.]
AD 26 | Pontius Pilate becomes Prefect/governor of Judea. He will govern until `AD 36`
±AD 27 | Jesus' public Ministry begins. He is about 30 years old (`Luke 3:23`).
AD 30 | Jesus is crucified, dead and buried. _But not for long_. [The other possible date for the crucifixion of Jesus is `AD 33`.  The professor thinks the biblical accounts fit best with a date of `AD 30`.]

## III. The Earliest = The  Apostolic Age
Year | Event
---: | :---
AD 30 | **Pentecost** — The Holy Spirit comes upon the disciples with power. The first preaching of the gospel by the apostles, by Peter.
±AD 31 | The first **Samaritans** respond to the gospel, in Samaria (`Acts 8`). It is authenticated by Peter and John; the Samaritan believers receive the Holy Spirit (`Acts 8:14-17`).
±AD 33 | **Paul's** conversion.  [His Jewish name was 'Saul'; his Roman name was 'Paul'; `Acts 13:9`.]
±AD 34 | The first **Gentiles** believe the gospel, when Peter preaches to the house of Cornelius (`Acts 10`). The Holy Spirit comes upon them (`Acts 10:44-47`).
47-48 | Paul's first missionary journey (Paul & Barnabas).
**AD 49** | The **Acts 15 Jerusalem Council**. [This is the first church council. It addressed the question: _Do Gentiles need to be circumcised to be saved?_ Its answer was: **No**.]
49-52 | Paul's second missionary journey. (Paul & Silas).
**50-70** | [Most of the NT epistles will be written from `AD 50` until `AD 70`.]
53-57 | Paul's third missionary journey. (Luke is with Paul for much of this journey).
AD 54 | Nero becomes Emperor of Rome (until `AD 68`).
AD 57 | Paul returns to Jerusalem; he is arrested there.
±57-59 | Paul imprisoned at Caesarea for two years (`Acts 24:27`).
AD 60 | Paul arrives in Rome.
60-62 | Paul remains in Rome under "house arrest." The book of Acts ends here.
±AD 63 | It appears that Paul was released from house arrest, based on the comments in `1 & 2 Timothy` and `Titus`.
AD 64 | Rome burns, and is largely destroyed. Nero blames the Christians. The persecution of Christians begins.
±65/66 | Paul is re-arrested.
AD 66 | The Jews revolt against Rome.
AD 67 | Roman armies lay siege to Jerusalem.
**±AD 67** | Death of Paul in Rome under the persecution of Nero. Probably also: Death of Peter, also under the persecution of Nero.
AD 68 | Death of Nero.
**AD 70** | **Jerusalem falls to the Romans; the second temple is destroyed**. The remaining Zealots flee to Masada, near the Dead Sea.
AD 73 | Destruction/suicide of the final Jewish resistance at Masada
±AD 100 | Death of the Apostle John; end of the Apostolic age.