### A. Definition: "Synoptic":

Matthew, Mark and Luke have come to be called the "Synoptic" Gospels because they contain much similar material.

```
The Gospel of John is quite different from them, and contains much material that Matthew, Mark, and Luke do not record.
```

The term "synoptic" is from the English term "synopsis", which suggests the idea that these three gospel accounts are "seeing together," are looking at the life of Jesus through the same lens.

Although Matthew, Mark, and Luke have much the same material (= have many parallel accounts), nonetheless, they each contain some material that the others do not contain. Matthew, Mark, and Luke are similar, but not identical.

### B. "Parallel Accounts" between the Gospels

When two or more gospels record the same event or sermon, we say they are "parallel accounts." Again, the gospels Matthew, Mark, and Luke have many parallel accounts.

Parallel accounts are often very similar, but sometimes they each give different details. Again, the accounts are _parallel_, but that does not mean…

In general, the **sequence of events** in the life of Jesus as recorded in Matthew, Mark, and Luke is the same. But it is not identical; there are some differences. This naturally raises the question: _Why would a gospel writer choose to present events in a different order from which they actually occurred?_ At the end of this handout, we will look at an example: The account of the temptation of Christ.

**Differences of Detail**. Even when parallel accounts are quite similar, nonetheless, there are often differences of detail or differences in specific wording.

This combination of close similarities and yet differences makes it very natural to compare the three Synoptic accounts. It also makes it natural to ask: _What order were they written in? Which one was written first?_

### C. What Order Were the Synoptic Gospels Written In?

This question is debated by scholars. ["Scholars" are university and seminary professors.]

A common assumption in the early church was that they were written in the order that ➜ they appear in the New Testament: Matthew first, then Mark, then Luke.

The view held by most modern scholars is that… _Mark is written first_

Most likely, Mark was written in the 50's, and Matthew and Luke in the early 60's.

#### Some reasons why scholars think Mark came first:

- **90%** of what Mark records can be found in Matthew or Luke. // And the 10% that is unique to Mark doesn't make a major contribution to our theology or to our understanding of Jesus. So if Matthew & Luke were already around, why produce Mark?

- Matthew's and Luke's grammar is more refined than Mark's.

- Some ways that Mark words things are hard to understand; in Matthew's parallel account they are often more clear.

**Question**: How Important is it for us to know which gospel was written first?

**Answer**:
- It is _not_ vital to know… _which is written first_

- Rather, it is helpful to observe… _differences between them_

### D. So ➜ How Should We Interpret and Compare the Synoptic Gospels?

1. **The proper starting point for interpreting a gospel is**…

2. **After that, it is legitimate to compare and contrast them**. The goals in doing so are>

   1. To identify more precisely…

   2. Then to use that improved understanding of each individual gospel…

3. **In particular, we should observe**:

   1. _Omitted Material_.

   2. _Different Location / Placement_ of an Episode

   3. _Differences in Detail_ of the Same Account.

   4. _Differences in Wording or Grammar_ of the Same Statement.

### E. One Example: The Temptation of Jesus: `Matt 4:1—11` ⇌ `Luke 4:1—12`

- **Q**: Whose account is probably in chronological order? _Matthew_

- **Q**: What makes us think so? _The presence of the words "then"_

- **Q**: Do we have a truth problem here?

- **Q**: What question comes last in Matthew's account? = what point is Matthew emphasizing?

- **Q**: So ➜ What point was Luke trying to emphasize? _Jesus was a Perfect Human Being_

### F. The Main Theme of Matthew of Mark and of Luke? What Audience Did Each Apostle Have in Mind?

- Matthew: _Jesus is the promised Messiah_

  Audience: Jews.

- Mark: _Faithful Servant_ (Good Worker)

  Audience: Roman, Roman soldiers.

  > And immediately…

- Luke: _Perfect Human Being_

  Audience: Gentiles, Greek (idea of perfection)
