
{% include session/youtube.html id='YxDofO-8abQ' %}

## I. Review: General Principles for Reading & Interpreting Narrative:

1. Bear in mind the mind the prior theological framework provided by Scripture comes before the passage you are reading. This can also be called the **redemptive-historical setting**.

2. With narrative, read it in a straight-forward manner unless there are good reasons to do otherwise.

   - In narrative proper… _narrator speaks_
     1. Always true
     2. Very little figurative language

   - But in dialogue and speeches…
     - more figurative language
     - more idioms

   An example of figurative language from the Gospel of John: `John 7:37-39`

       37 On the last and greatest day of the festival, Jesus stood and said in a loud voice, "Let anyone who is thirsty come to me and drink. 38 Whoever believes in me, as Scripture has said, rivers of living water will flow from within them." 39 By this he meant the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were later to receive. Up to that time the Spirit had not been given, since Jesus had not yet been glorified.

3. Pay attention to the **editorial comments**.

4. Pay attention to the **dialogue**, esp. to **major speeches** and **major prayers**.

5. Try to identify: What is the point, the purpose of this episode? Why is it recorded?

6. Do _not_ go off on tangents about some particular detail in a narrative passage until you have identified the overall purpose & function of the passage.

7. In general, things which are unclear are to be judged by the context of the entire Bible, by the clear general teaching of the rest of Scripture.

## II. In the New Testament in Particular:

### A. In the Gospels:

1. The statements and discourses of Jesus are always important.

   At this point, there is a practical difference between the NT and the OT:

   - In the Old Testament, when someone is speaking… _they could be lying_
   - But in the NT, when Jesus is speaking, there is no doubt about this.

2. In the NT, an event or a confrontation often leads to Jesus making a statement. Such statements probably give us…

3. In like manner, all of the _actions_ of Jesus are approved, are good and commendable.

4. As in the OT, in the NT, if something is given lengthy treatment, it is important.

5. If an event or sermon is recorded in multiple gospels, it is especially important.

   For example, what are some events or miracles that are recorded in all four gospels?

6. Note wording that draws you in to vividly envision the event being described.

   Example: The beginning of the Sermon on the Mount in `Matthew 5:2`.

7. Try to identify where narrative segments begin and end = define the individual segments.
   - __
   - __

## B. In the Acts of the Apostles:

1. Regarding major *sermons* by the apostles in the book of Acts… _they are rock solid_

2. Many *events* recorded in the book of Acts are *unique*.

   - Peter's first sermon
   - First gentile's conversion

3. Acts is a book of… **transition**

   This distinguishes it from the _epistles_, which give us **normative** teaching and practice.

   An example of an event that reflects a **transition**: `Acts 19:1-7`.

A suggestion from the professor, as regards understanding and applying the book of Acts:

   - The __events__ in the book of Acts may or may not set examples that are normative for Christians

   - However, we may look to the __sermons__ in the book of Acts for dependable, normative doctrine.
